[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA GARR: Everything we
do is based on the agreements
that we have made.
If it's agreements
with ourselves
or other people
or God or life, we
have set it up at some point.
So what if we were to
do this intentionally,
like Don Miguel Ruiz
suggests in his book
"The Four Agreements,"
which, by the way,
it spent almost a decade on "The
New York Times" bestseller list
and sold over 7 million copies.
Based on the ancient
Toltec wisdom,
"The Four Agreements" offers
a powerful code of conduct
that can rapidly
transform our lives
to a new experience of
freedom, of true happiness,
and of ultimately love.
I am so honored to be welcomed
here by Don Miguel Ruiz.
Thank you so much
for being here.
>>DON MIGUEL RUIZ:
Well, it is my pleasure.
It's great to meet you.
>>LISA: Absolutely.
Thank you.
We have spent time together
at some incredible moments
in my life.
I remember there was once we
were at a conference together,
and there was an
exercise where we are all
giving each other hugs.
And out of all the people
that I was hugging,
I got a hug from you
and I burst into tears
because you showed me
what pure love felt like.
I will always remember that.
You really represent that
heart-opening incredible pure
love.
So I know that people
will be able to feel that
by listening to our interview
today, so thank you.
>>RUIZ: Well,
you're very welcome.
>>LISA: You experienced
that all day, don't you?
Do you?
>>RUIZ: Well, I am love,
but you are also love.
And everybody is love,
they just don't know.
But they are.
Well, like I say, they
just don't believe it.
>>LISA: There's a
lot of things that
knock us off that love,
though, Don Miguel.
>>RUIZ: Sure.
>>LISA: A lot of
challenges, a lot
of wrongness, a lot of
hurt, which brings me
to "The Four Agreements."
>>RUIZ: Well, that's
the reason why
I create this book, to solve
a problem that we all have,
and that problem is
the domestication.
>>LISA: What is that?
What is domestication?
>>RUIZ: Well, we are
animals, and we're
trained to please other people.
OK?
They prepare us to
be part of society.
This society exists even
long before we was born.
And society is
changing all the time,
have all these rules, all
the laws, the ways you have
to behave, all those beliefs.
There's so many beliefs--
political beliefs, real
issues beliefs, sports.
It's all iterations.
It's something that
is already ongoing.
We personally didn't create it.
We was born here.
And when our brain was
getting more and more mature,
our parents hook our
attention and they start
teaching us what they know.
And what they know
is the society.
We go to school, and they
teach us also what they know.
They prepare us to be
part of that society,
and we believe everything.
We was domesticated to be
a human being according
to the idea of what
a human being is.
>>LISA: You're right.
We are people-pleasing
machines, aren't we?
From very early on, we want to
please our parents for love.
Our parents want us to
please them for love.
We go into society, we're
judged on our grades, what
we're asked to perform
at a certain level
in order to hit certain
markers in your childhood
and adolescence and adulthood
and work life and everything.
We are people-pleasing machines.
>>RUIZ: Yes, we are
domesticated animals,
and we produce
that domestication.
Well, we create a whole belief
system, very complicated,
and we adopt all the rules
that exist in society
and we apply it to ourself.
We have all the beliefs about
whatever religion we follow,
about all what we
say a little before.
But what about if it's
not true what we believe?
What about that?
>>LISA: Yeah, that
blows your mind.
Yeah, it really
changes everything.
>>RUIZ: Exactly.
Then with these
Four Agreements is
like a challenge to
everything that we
believe because we create all
those agreements to support
everything that we believe--
what is good, bad, right,
wrong, should be, shouldn't be.
We like to judge everybody, and
we judge ourself the same way.
We are the worst judge to
ourself than anybody else.
And we judge ourself according
to rules of the domestication
that we have.
>>LISA: Yes.
Society, performance,
all of these things.
So did "The Four
Agreements" come out
of your experience in being
raised in the Toltec way?
Did you come about
these four agreements
because of what you
were experiencing
with domestication?
>>RUIZ: OK, let me tell
you how that happened.
I used to be a medical
doctor, a surgeon,
and I practiced dental
surgery with my brother,
who is an oral surgeon.
I was just a surgeon, but
I practiced a lot with him.
But in certain moment,
I see that the problem
is in the mind, not
in the physical body.
Then at that moment,
I really want
to understand how
the mind works.
Then I stop being
a medical doctor.
I went back to my mother, who
carried the Toltec knowledge,
and she becomes my mentor.
Then I didn't really
leave the medicine behind.
I just changed the direction.
I focus all my intention into
understand the human mind
until it was as
clear as water to me.
The I start working
with apprentices
for around 10 years, more
and more apprentices.
I create so many
different ways how
to study them, how to help
them in the integration
of their life, and the result,
it was "The Four Agreements."
>>LISA: Ah It's interesting
you came about it
from the opposite way
of looking at the mind
and looking at surgery
and looking at damage
and wondering where
did this start.
>>RUIZ: Then when
the mind becomes
to be like a clear
water, I see also
the solutions because I
understand the problem was
the human domestication.
And we want to be free
of that domestication.
Then four simple agreements
becomes the biggest challenge
to doubt about
everything that we know.
Well, in the beginning, it
was already five agreements,
but I decide to work only the
four ones because the fifth one
I thought it was too
much for anybody.
Anyway, years later, my son Jose
wrote "The Fifth Agreement."
Then it came out anyway.
>>LISA: Yes.
Can we talk about
"The Four Agreements"?
>>RUIZ: Sure.
>>LISA: So the first
one is to always
be impeccable with your word.
>>RUIZ: Be impeccable
with the word.
Well, we need to understand
that we live in a story
that we create, and
that story is not real.
It's virtual.
>>LISA: It's woven.
>>RUIZ: Mm-hm.
We believe that we see
objects, but it's not true.
We perceive light.
The light that is coming
from those objects
hit the object, going into
our eye and project it.
And that is easy to prove
because right now if you
look around, you'll
see a lot of objects.
But as soon as you close your
eyes, everything disappear.
>>LISA: Your perception
of them disappears, yes.
>>RUIZ: Close your eyes,
everything disappear.
Open your eyes,
everything appear
because it's a projection.
But our mind, we
can say our brain
have the property to
make sense of everything,
and the mind is just a
reflection of what we perceive.
>>LISA: True.
>>RUIZ: But with the brain,
we just don't see the things,
we judge things.
We classify it.
We explain it, and we believe
that what we see is real.
>>LISA: Well, some of it
is, though, Don Miguel.
Some of the things are real.
>>RUIZ: Well, the ones that
is in your mind is not real.
It is just an image.
An image of a flower, then
that is outside of you.
You touch the
flower, that is real.
But the one that is in your
eyes, that is in your brain
is not real.
But you create from that image a
whole story, and in that story,
you are the main character.
You create everything,
and you fill it
with all the
secondary characters,
not just persons, but
objects, circumstances.
All the events that are
happening around you
is part of your story.
And everything that happen
to you, it really be
analyzed by what you believe.
You judge it, you qualify it,
and you store it in that way.
But it's already distort.
>>LISA: It's the story
that we're storing.
>>RUIZ: It is the story by the
domestication that we have.
>>LISA: Well, let's talk about
an extreme example, if we can.
A flower I understand.
You touch a flower,
and then you have
the perception of a flower.
But when you see something
like abuse, and then you see,
I mean, I hate animal abuse,
and I hate abusive people.
And when I close my
eyes, that still exists.
>>RUIZ: Yeah, but because
it's already in your brain.
>>LISA: My perception
of it is real.
>>RUIZ: Mm-hm.
Yes, but you have to
see that is the result
of all the domestication.
Because when you was growing up,
our parents say, this is bad,
this is Violence is not good.
It's abusive.
We qualified everything.
Then we already have
that in our mind.
Could be a truth or not.
At the moment, it's
not really important
if it's true or is not true.
But what is in our mind is not
real, but is based in reality.
Because let's say
your parents exist,
they really exist, but the
ones who exist in your mind,
in your brain, is just a
projection of what is real.
Then you create your reality
with all those images
based in reality.
>>LISA: So you just said it.
You can create a
different reality.
>>RUIZ: Exactly.
And you qualify.
You can say, this is bad.
I hate this, I love this, I'm
indifferent to this, et cetera,
et cetera.
But this is your creation,
it's the story where you live,
and you are the main
character of that story.
And you use the word in
order to create the story.
Then depends how you
use the word is how
you're going to live your life.
If you are impeccable
with the word,
your life will be
wonderful all the time.
>>LISA: And then you
take it to the next step
was not to take it personally.
So if you really look
at that situation,
which appears to be
real, and then you
can change your perception
of it by realizing
not to take it personally.
>>RUIZ: OK, first,
let's see what
happen if we misuse the word.
>>LISA: OK.
>>RUIZ: If we misuse the
word, we create that chaos.
We create our personal hell.
>>LISA: Give me an example.
>>RUIZ: Well, whatever
drama we create
in life, any drama, or
other people's drama
that we're involved and
participate in all those dramas
is because we are
misusing the word.
But either way is our reality.
>>LISA: I see.
>>RUIZ: Now other
people around us,
they do exactly the same thing.
They create their own reality,
and they're the main characters
in their story.
Then in their stories, you are
only a secondary character.
They don't know you.
They only know the
secondary character
who lives in their
mind, which is not you.
>>LISA: So all of
our relationships
are the secondary
characters in our minds.
>>RUIZ: Yes.
>>LISA: And we have a
perception about those.
>>RUIZ: --Your job, your boss,
they are secondary characters,
but they're based in reality
because they really exist.
But you distort
everything, and that
is in your particular universe.
>>LISA: Yes, I understand.
>>RUIZ: Then when you
understand that point,
you will understand
why also it's better
not to take this personally.
Because whatever
they say about you,
they will say it about
the image that they
have of you in their story.
They don't know you, and
you also don't know them.
You only know what you
believe about them.
>>LISA: What if it's happening
to you, like you are getting
fired or you're getting
a divorce or things
are happening to you?
How do you not take
that personally?
>>RUIZ: Well, it's so easy.
Let's see if you
see "The Godfather"?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>RUIZ: They say, this is not
personal, this is business.
>>LISA: [LAUGHS] Yes.
>>RUIZ: Then all those
divorce, all those things
that happen in our life
is the result of something
that we already did.
They are business.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>RUIZ: We don't
take it personally.
If you're going
through a divorce,
well, first, you have to see why
you went through that divorce.
What's happened
in that matrimony?
You don't want to live with
that person, you go to divorce.
And you know it will
have consequences,
either good consequences
or bad consequences,
depending how you take it.
>>LISA: So if you're a child,
a product of a divorced family,
how do you not take
that personally?
>>RUIZ: Well, being a child is
a little more difficult perhaps,
but with a little help,
if Mama knows that,
she will help you not
to take it personally.
She will say, it's not
your father, it is not me,
things just happen.
And you can be happy with this,
you could stay tied with me,
tied to your father, and
you can make it so easy.
But also, you can do
exactly the opposite.
Oh, your father did that to me.
You can put all that
emotional poisons
into your son or daughter,
and that will affect
your son or your daughter.
And he will take
everything personally,
and he will blame
him or blame you.
It doesn't matter.
>>LISA: Which goes to the
third agreement, which is--
>>RUIZ: Don't make assumptions.
Exactly.
But we make the assumption
that people will judge you
the way you judge them.
That is the perhaps the
easy way to understand what
don't make assumptions means.
>>LISA: Say that again.
>>RUIZ: You can
make the assumptions
that people will judge you
the way you judge them.
>>LISA: That is so true.
>>RUIZ: And you will see
that you judge yourself
for not being the
way you should be
according what you
believe you should be,
which means according
to your domestication.
>>LISA: You got to put the
mirror back on yourself.
>>RUIZ: Exactly.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>RUIZ: Then by don't
making assumptions,
that give you immunity
in interaction
that you have with yourself.
>>LISA: It's the
lack of judgment.
It's the ultimate.
We do have a society
that judges so much.
We compare and judge,
and we are judged--
>>RUIZ: And we try
to please everybody
to avoid that judgment, and
we would put ourself at last.
We sacrifice ourself for
so many different things.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
So to be impeccable
with our word,
to not take it personally,
to not make assumptions.
And the fourth agreement?
>>RUIZ: That's my favorite one.
Always do your best.
>>LISA: That's integrity, yes.
>>RUIZ: Well, this is action.
>>LISA: OK.
>>RUIZ: The other three is
just on the level of the mind.
We may understand it, but
if we don't do our best,
it never will work.
We humans, we have so
many wonderful ideas.
And with the action,
we manifest the ideas.
When we understand
that point, we
understand all the
different civilizations
that exists on the planet Earth,
from the Egyptians, the Romans,
the Greeks, any other
nation around the world
and how they evolve.
Present time, we have
these wonderful phones.
We have computers.
We went to the moon.
We create great things that
can build so many things,
but we also can
destroy everything.
>>LISA: Yeah.
So true.
>>RUIZ: We have all those great
ideas that by doing our best,
we manifested, that
we manifest our dreams
if we take the action,
if we make it happen.
And this happen, and every
single moment is changing.
Then even if we
don't want it, we
live always in the present time.
Only the present time exists.
But it's moving,
it's not static.
Then as soon the second
pass, whatever is before
is just a memory.
It's not real anymore.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>RUIZ: It already is gone.
And it's in this
moment we are creating.
And what we create?
Our own the story of our life.
>>LISA: It really forces you to
be in present time, it really
does, when you look at it that
way and to stay in that place
and going forward in action.
But it forces you to
be in present time.
>>RUIZ: Then you see that
these four agreements
will challenge all the belief
that we have in our mind one
by one.
>>LISA: I gave an example
earlier of my father passing,
and you said that it
is not my father who
has passed in my mind.
He will always be in my mind.
>>RUIZ: He always will be there.
>>LISA: And that's
my perception,
and I can hold onto that.
>>RUIZ: Oh, definitely,
because he's always there.
If you daydream, you
can think about him
and you even can hear his voice.
You can even have
a conversation,
but you know that
is only your mind.
As you go to sleep,
you really can
have those wonderful
dialogues and you can even
hear what he tells you.
>>LISA: Yes.
I want to think it's him.
I don't want to think
it's my imagination.
>>RUIZ: Well, it is
you because everything
that is in your story, all
the secondary characters
is really you.
Then your father pass, mm-hm?
>>LISA: Yes.
>>RUIZ: But his body
was just where he lives.
It was his home.
Like this body is my home.
I am not my body.
I give life to my body.
>>LISA: Every day.
>>RUIZ: Every single
moment until the moment
comes that my body can't
have me any longer.
Then it going to push me out.
Then the body will
decay, will disappear,
but I am eternal
because I am energy.
Energy is eternal.
It just gets transferred,
but it cannot be destroyed.
The body is matter.
It has a beginning,
it has an end.
But what I really am,
I'm just that energy
who give life to my body.
And same with you and
same with everybody else.
Then a lifetime is
a very short time.
>>LISA: It is.
>>RUIZ: Let's say if
we live 100 years.
>>LISA: Yes, it's so short.
>>RUIZ: 100 years with eternity.
>>LISA: In the soul's
journey, it is so short.
Yes.
>>RUIZ: Then the
question is, well,
what are we going
to do in the time
that we live in our
physical bodies?
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>RUIZ: If we are
impeccable with the word,
we really can enjoy our
life in every single moment.
>>LISA: That is such a key.
That is absolutely the key.
Yes.
With the however many
days we have in this body,
what are we going to
do with those days?
And being impeccable
with your word,
not taking things personally,
to waste that energy, to really
be fully authentic, and to get
things done, to move forward.
Don't make assumptions.
Don't waste your energy
on that, but really
to always do your best.
>>RUIZ: And be skeptical,
but learn to listen.
>>LISA: That's a big
one, the fifth one.
>>RUIZ: It's the
fifth agreement.
>>LISA: Before we go there, I
want you to take a look here
at Don Miguel talking
about the four agreements.
Take a look at this.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> What you are seeing and
hearing right now is nothing
but a dream.
You're dreaming right
now in this moment.
You're dreaming with
the brain awake.
Before we were born,
the humans before us
created a big
outside dream that we
will call society's dream,
or the dream of the planet.
[HORNS HONKING]
The dream of the planet
includes all of society's rules,
its beliefs, its
laws, its religions,
its different cultures
and ways to be,
its governments, schools,
social events, and holidays.
The outside dream
has so many rules
that when a new human is born,
we hook the child's attention
and introduce these rules
into his or her mind.
As children, we didn't
have the opportunity
to choose our
beliefs, but we agreed
with the information that was
passed to us from the dream
of the planet via other humans.
I call this process the
domestication of humans.
We trust what we
believe, and our beliefs
set us up for suffering.
In the dream of the planet,
it is normal for humans
to suffer, to live in fear,
and to create emotional dramas.
Our personal dream can also
become an ongoing nightmare,
where we suffer and
live in a state of fear.
But we don't need to
dream a nightmare.
It is possible to
enjoy a pleasant dream.
There are thousands
of agreements
you have made with
yourself, with other people,
with God, with society, with
your parents, with your spouse,
with your children.
But the most
important agreements
are the ones you
made with yourself.
In these agreements, you
tell yourself who you are,
what you feel, what you
believe, and how to behave.
One single agreement
is not such a problem,
but we have many agreements
that make us suffer,
that make us fail in life.
If you want to live a life
of joy and fulfillment,
you have to find the courage
to break those agreements that
are fear-based and claim
your personal power.
When we're finally ready
to change our agreements,
there are four very
powerful agreements
that will help us break those
agreements that come from fear
and deplete our energy.
You need a very
strong will in order
to adopt the four agreements.
But if you can begin
to live your life
with these agreements, the
transformation in your life
will be amazing.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>LISA: It's true, you do
need a very strong will--
>>RUIZ: Definitely.
>>LISA: --To live by
these four agreements.
And you were
mentioning the fifth.
Tell me about the
fifth agreement.
>>RUIZ: It's be skeptical,
but learn to listen.
Think when we
practice these four
agreements for a certain time,
you can say for a long time,
the moment comes I shall really
live in these four agreements.
Shall not pretend that you are
living the four agreements.
And that's when the
fifth agreement start.
Be skeptical, but
learn to listen.
Be skeptical doesn't
mean that because you
feel that you are more
intelligent than anybody else,
you don't believe what they say.
No, not at all.
You are skeptical
because you don't
take whatever they say is true
for them, but not true for you.
They give the message
according what they believe.
>>LISA: Yes, their
beliefs systems.
>>RUIZ: From whatever
they believe,
you can take what works
for you and push away
what it doesn't work for you.
That's why it's important
to learn, to listen.
>>LISA: To be a compassionate
listener, but yet.
>>RUIZ: Yes, you listen
to what they say.
>>LISA: Is that what
you mean by that?
>>RUIZ: Yes, you listen.
Whatever they say, you listen.
Many times almost from
the very beginning,
you know that you will not
get anything from there.
>>LISA: Isn't that
people pleasing?
>>RUIZ: Hmm?
>>LISA: Isn't that
pleasing people?
>>RUIZ: No, not really.
>>LISA: OK.
There's a difference.
>>RUIZ: Because if they
hold your attention,
they will give a message to you.
Then you can make a
choice, you want to listen
or you don't want to listen.
But when you learn
to listen it's
because they really
hold your attention
and there's something that
could be good for you.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>RUIZ: And you
hear what they say.
They can have great ideas.
OK, that works for me.
But then you also hear
superstitions, mm-hm,
and it doesn't work for you.
But you listen anyway,
and you respect it
because it's the way they are.
It's OK.
They can believe
whatever they want to.
It's not your problem.
They create their own story.
They're domesticated
in their own way.
They believe whatever
they believe.
It doesn't mean that it's
good or bad or right or wrong.
It's just a point of view.
When you reached
this fifth agreement,
you live with these
four agreements,
something very
interesting happen.
That will means that is
the end of your world,
the end of your reality,
because you no longer believe
all of that.
>>LISA: It's freedom.
>>RUIZ: Exactly.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>RUIZ: You are completely free.
Then you becomes a master.
Imagine Jesus in
the desert 40 days
facing the snake, facing Satan.
Well, Satan has Jesus face.
He's facing Himself.
In 40 days, He no
longer believe,
but He listen everything.
And all the lies
goes completely away,
and now that Satan is
not a challenge anymore.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>RUIZ: The one who
believes all your lies.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>RUIZ: Then Jesus face the
main character of Jesus's story,
and by the end, He
say, you are not real.
Same with Siddhartha.
Siddhartha is in the Bodhi
Tree, and he's facing Mara.
Mara is exactly the
same face as Siddhartha.
And by the end, he
say, you are not real.
The Earth is my witness,
you are not real.
Then he becomes Buddha.
>>LISA: So those are our demons,
those are our inner demons
that we face.
>>RUIZ: Well, we call it
demons, but it's really
the main character
of your story.
In my case, it was Miguel.
In your case, it's your name.
>>LISA: Did you discover this
when you had a heart attack?
>>RUIZ: No, long before that.
Long, long before that.
I discovered that in
the time that I decide
to stop being a medical doctor.
When I decide to really go to
understand the human mind, just
to see if everybody
else was the same way
that I was at that time.
And we all are the same.
>>LISA: We are?
>>RUIZ: Of course
we are the same.
The difference is
what we believe.
>>LISA: Right.
>>RUIZ: And it's not real.
Then our belief system, more
than 90% is nothing but lies,
misinterpretations.
>>LISA: Our demons are lies.
All of that is all made up.
>>RUIZ: And that comes
from we can say the very
first distortion that we make.
Because what we
really are is love.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>RUIZ: But we learn to love the
same way that our parents love,
the same way that--
>>LISA: Their parents loved.
>>RUIZ: --Everybody
around us love.
And they love with
conditions, which
means I love you if
you let me control you.
If you let me control you, we
can be very happy all the time.
>>LISA: Yeah.
>>RUIZ: But if somebody
tells you, I love you,
you let me control you, you
will say, oh, wait a minute,
no one will control me.
But we want control
everybody, but we
don't want to be controlled.
>>LISA: Why does
human nature do that?
Why does human nature
need to control?
>>RUIZ: Because we learn, we
was domesticated that way.
And then that's the way we love.
I love you if.
That's the way they love us.
They love us if we
let them control us.
But the worst part
is that we learn
to love ourself
exactly the same way.
I love myself if, if
life becomes the way
I wish to be according
everybody else's opinions.
>>LISA: If you have
that level of self-love,
you don't need that
validation so much.
>>RUIZ: Then when you
understand this point,
now you can understand easily
all the violence in the world,
you can understand war.
We can understand that
everybody's in a war of control
with everybody around them.
And even with themselves
they have that war of control
in their own mind because
they cannot control themselves
according of what they believe.
>>LISA: Believe in.
I've been looking at
the news with the hate
crimes that go on all the time.
And the people that are
committing these hate crimes
have these demons,
these inner demons,
or these resolutions that have
never been made and grievances,
and they cannot get beyond that.
And for the people
that it happens to,
you tell them not to
take it personally?
They're going to
tell you, yes, I'm
going to take this personally.
>>RUIZ: Well, that's
the only way they know.
This is OK.
There's nothing wrong with that.
It's OK.
But what is important at least
is to understand the point.
And a way you can see
that the result of that
is the creation of
those three questions.
>>LISA: OK, so there's the
newest book that you have
called "The Three Questions."
>>RUIZ: "The Three Questions."
>>LISA: And it applies
to "The Four Agreements."
>>RUIZ: Oh, definitely,
because we can say our goal
or wish the way we want to be.
These are questions that
we have since millennials.
>>LISA: A long time, yes.
>>RUIZ: What am I?
What is real?
And what is love?
>>LISA: Those are
the three questions.
>>RUIZ: The three questions.
And there are questions that
are changing all the time.
>>LISA: What am I?
What is real?
What is love?
>>RUIZ: What is love?
>>LISA: So the answers to those
questions are ever changing?
>>RUIZ: Well, to
answer those questions,
we use the most wonderful tools,
which is these five agreements.
Then when we're using
these five agreements,
we are changing our reality.
But the reality is changing
anyway just by itself.
>>LISA: So if I'm
asking what is real,
I go back to the four
agreements and I say, well,
am I impeccable with my word?
Am I taking things personally?
Am I making assumptions?
>>RUIZ: Well, those
are the tools.
>>LISA: OK.
>>RUIZ: But to see what is real,
in order to get the answer,
first you have to
see what is not real.
And to answer what
is not real, now you
use these five agreements.
That's the tools.
>>LISA: Ah, I see.
Can you give me an example of
how this would work in life?
>>RUIZ: OK, let's say
you are 12 years old, OK?
This is your reality.
In that reality, of
course you're real.
You have your name, everybody
tells you what you are,
and this is what
you believe you are.
Then that school
where you go is real,
your parents, your family is
real, all that is real for you.
>>LISA: All the conditions
around you are real.
>>RUIZ: And love is conditional.
>>LISA: Yes.
>>RUIZ: Mm-hm.
Then using these
four agreements,
you are doubting
about all of that.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>RUIZ: Then when
a crisis happen,
something that is not
exactly what you want,
now you put in doubt.
Let's say you are in a
lecture, in a big conference.
All of a sudden, you go blank
in front of 1,000 people.
You just get out of
there, you go by yourself,
and now you start
judging yourself.
Look at why I do that,
why should I said that.
I'm this, I'm that.
You are judging yourself.
>>LISA: Mistake, embarrassment,
all of that happens.
>>RUIZ: You feel that maybe
it is the end of the world.
How can everything keeps going
when this happened to you?
What am I?
I feel stupid, I'm this, I'm
that, et cetera, et cetera.
Well, with the four
agreements, I still
just say no and will
help you to recover
from that little crisis.
>>LISA: My goodness.
Yes.
It would be catastrophic
in your mind otherwise.
And you can really--
>>RUIZ: And you recover.
>>LISA: Mm-hm.
You can work through it,
and these are the tools
on how to work through it.
>>RUIZ: This crisis that
happened in our life.
>>LISA: Otherwise we would
say, well, what am I?
Well, I am stupid.
Well, you would use
the four agreements
to then override that and say
>>RUIZ: Just had to say no.
It was just a
mistake or whatever.
It doesn't matter.
>>LISA: I can see this
different or whatever, yeah.
>>RUIZ: And let's say that
we lost someone that we love.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
>>RUIZ: Then how can
everything keeps going
when my husband, my son die?
It's very painful.
But is that real?
>>LISA: It looks real.
>>RUIZ: Is what religion
tell me is real,
what moral tell me is real?
Am I real?
>>LISA: Well, let's
take a great example.
So I lost my father.
And my parents were married
for almost 60 years,
and they were together
since they were 13.
They were the only
couple, that they only
knew each other for 60 years
in terms of being a couple.
They were bonded at the hip.
So my father's
passing has really
affected my mother, where she
feels that she's lost herself.
>>RUIZ: Of course.
>>LISA: And this is very common
with people, who die shortly
after their loved ones,
because a whole piece of them
goes missing.
>>RUIZ: Of course.
>>LISA: What could
I tell my mother?
Don't take it personally?
I can't.
>>RUIZ: No.
Just love her just the
way she is, and it's OK.
That's all she needs, yes.
>>LISA: She's wondering,
who am I without him?
>>RUIZ: Exactly.
>>LISA: What do I tell her?
>>RUIZ: You are always
you, and it's OK,
it's OK to have the pain.
It's OK to overcome whenever.
And to let her know
even if she understand
or not that, well, the image of
your father lives in her mind,
that she can keep
communicating with him,
talking to him knowing that the
body is gone because he doesn't
live anymore, but all the image
that she have for all those 60
years is still there.
>>LISA: Yes, very much.
>>RUIZ: And of course,
she can hold his hand.
>>LISA: Right.
That's the hardest
part is the touch.
It's the hardest part,
yeah, for everyone.
>>RUIZ: She need to the touch,
but she do it in her own time.
It's OK.
Then the only thing is just
too love her, to support her.
It's OK, it's fine, and do
the best you can for her.
But that goes to
the third one, what
is love, because that would take
you for what you really are.
In order to answer that, you
need to see what love is not.
Is your jealousy love?
Is your control issues love?
>>LISA: I'm just thinking of
someone who maybe loses a child
or loses a sibling, and
they can't touch that child
or the sibling any longer.
And I was just about
to ask you that,
but you answered it to the
question of what is love.
Well, love is everlasting.
>>RUIZ: Yes.
>>LISA: The love of that child--
>>RUIZ: Is eternal.
>>LISA: Eternal.
And the love of the
sibling is eternal.
>>RUIZ: Love is life itself.
It's energy.
It's pure energy.
It's unconditional.
>>LISA: So can we love the
people that do the hate crimes?
Can we love the
wrongness in the world?
>>RUIZ: Well, we don't
have a choice, really.
We can judge them, and we do.
>>LISA: And we can get mad.
>>RUIZ: Mm-hm.
And we do.
>>LISA: Yes.
And we can get angry.
>>RUIZ: But you can do something
that could be very interesting.
You can get out and see
everything from the top.
You can see how humanity is only
one made by billions of people
and have a whole story.
Humanity has a beginning
and will have an end.
Then by seeing humanity
that way, you take one human
and you see the whole destiny
of humanity in only one human.
The whole steps you
see the one human.
>>LISA: So with all of humanity
and morality and immorality,
you see one human.
>>RUIZ: Yes.
>>LISA: From that perspective.
>>RUIZ: From that perspective.
And you see that all humans
are exactly the same.
What will change is
what they believe.
We're born, we grow up,
we reproduce hopefully,
we get old, and we live.
We live through a body.
And the story also has a
beginning and has an end.
Then it begins
when the brain get
more mature that we can
hook with our attention,
we can create a whole reality.
But that will depends of
how the brain function.
>>LISA: Perceives
it, really, yes.
>>RUIZ: Because there may come
the day when the brain is no
longer good enough--
we can say it that way,
that's not exactly correct--
and then the reflections
are not the same,
the mind is not the same.
We can forget things.
Our mind is dissipating
little by little.
But at the moment that
the brain stop working,
we no longer reflect
the outside reality.
The mind is gone like that also.
>>LISA: Interesting, yes.
>>RUIZ: If you see
a mirror, everything
that is in the mirror
is a copy of everything
that is outside of the mirror,
but could be so clear that you
think it's real.
You want to touch
something, but you only
will touch the
surface of the mirror.
>>LISA: That's a great example.
>>RUIZ: It is exactly the same
that our eyes and our brain.
>>LISA: Yes, interesting.
>>RUIZ: If you break the mirror,
it's not reflecting anything.
>>LISA: It's shattered, yes.
>>RUIZ: Then when the
brain doesn't work anymore,
there's no more reflection,
there is no more mind.
The mind is gone, but
the body can still alive.
>>LISA: It's all about
changing your perception.
It takes strength
to do something
like this, a
different perspective.
>>RUIZ: Your reason is gone,
the judgments are gone,
belief system is gone.
>>LISA: And you're
a clean slate.
>>RUIZ: But your
body can still alive.
And that may happen to many
of us after certain age.
>>LISA: There is
a great video here
I want you to take a look
at talking about humanity,
and it really could
be the solution
on how to change the world.
Look at Don Miguel
talking about this.
>>RUIZ: I come with you
to asking you a favor,
and the favor is, please
help me to change the world.
[APPLAUSE]
And I don't refer to
the world of humanity.
I mean the world
that you create,
your own creation, your world
that is only true for you,
but for nobody else.
You create the
story of your life.
You create an entire reality
that is only true for you.
There is 6 billion people in
the world on this planet Earth,
6 billion people who
create their own story.
I can say 6 billions of artists
because we all are artists.
We create.
I create my personal world,
the world of Don Miguel Ruiz.
It's just a story.
It's not even real.
And by the way, it's not true.
Like your story is
not true either,
but you believe it's true.
You create your own story,
and we live in that story.
It's so perfect that we
don't notice that we live
in the story that we create.
In that story, we create
multiple secondary characters.
Every person that you
know and many others
that you don't know, but you
know about them, all of them
are part of the
world in your world.
But the most important
part in your creation
is the main character, and
that main character is you.
You create the main
character of your story,
and the whole
story is about you.
In my story, the main
character is Miguel Ruiz.
But he's just a character.
He's not even real.
It's not true.
But my whole story
is about Miguel Ruiz.
It's how Miguel Ruiz
perceive everything.
It's about how Miguel Ruiz
believe about everything
he believes.
But it's just his point of
view, and that point of view
is changing all the time.
Just like in your own
story, your point of view
is changing all the time.
>>LISA: That is so true.
So how can we
create a new story?
How can we do that if we
really already created
this life as our story?
So can we recreate it?
>>RUIZ: Oh, definitely.
>>LISA: The way we want to?
>>RUIZ: Definitely.
>>LISA: That's the
whole point, right?
>>RUIZ: Exactly.
After the fifth agreement,
where you no longer believe
all your lies, when you learn
to respect yourself completely
and you can respect everybody
around you completely
and accept them just
the way they are,
now your story is different.
And now you, the main
character of your story,
it becomes an ally.
It's helping you to live
in this personal paradise
that you just create.
And you no longer really
belongs to everybody around you,
but you understand them.
They will not understand
you, but it's not important
if they understand you or not.
>>LISA: So if somebody is
sick and they're creating,
that's essentially a story
that they're creating
of a sickness, of a sick body?
>>RUIZ: Well, the
body gets sick.
Even if we don't want to,
the body will get sick.
>>LISA: Hmm, interesting.
>>RUIZ: When all the
organs start failing,
the body will get sick.
If we get an infection,
If we have an accident,
we break the spine,
the body will be sick.
2002 I have a heart attack.
I almost die.
I was nine weeks in coma.
>>LISA: Wow.
>>RUIZ: I come back, and my body
was not the same any longer.
My body was in
pain all the time.
Nobody noticed.
They didn't know that
my body was in pain.
But I want to live and to enjoy.
I knew that my body
was like an old car,
but it's taking me
any place I want to.
And I had so much
love for this body.
I take care of my
body the best I can.
Doctors tell me that I may
live one year, maybe two years.
Well, it was almost
seven, eight years.
>>LISA: Long ago, yes.
>>RUIZ: And I decide
to have a new heart.
Then I have a new heart.
>>LISA: You got an
entire heart transplant.
>>RUIZ: Yes, in 2010, I
have a heart transplant,
eight years later.
And now it's 2009 and I'm
still in my physical body.
And yes, my body's
been sick, but we all
will die for one
reason or another.
>>LISA: But you don't
create a story around it.
>>RUIZ: Of course I'm not.
I didn't create the bones of
my body, and nobody really do.
They chastised them so many
times because they get sick.
Well, so what?
If I can live the way I can
live, someone with cancer
can live with that cancer until
the body just kick him out.
It's OK.
>>LISA: To not create
a story around it.
>>RUIZ: Yeah.
And let's say that we are sick.
It's nobody's fault,
not even our fault.
There's no one to
blame about for that.
>>LISA: I want to apply this to
everything, so money, finances.
Say someone is devastated,
financially broke,
can't make ends meet.
Are they creating
a story around it?
Or could it be the circumstances
that made that happen?
>>RUIZ: Well, let's say
that they make choices,
and those choices
have repercussions.
It's the result of
choices they made.
Let's say that someone
got addicted going
to alcohol or anything else.
The result will be that
sooner or later, they will
lose whatever they had before.
But it's a result
of their decisions.
There's no one to blame.
>>LISA: So did they
create a story around it?
>>RUIZ: Of course they
create all the stories.
They blame everybody else.
It was not me.
>>LISA: And believe the stories.
>>RUIZ: They believe it,
of course, which is OK.
There's nothing wrong
with that because it's
in our nature we create stories.
We are storytellers.
We are dreaming all the time.
>>LISA: Until you
rise above it and get
into a different
perspective, and then you
start to look at, as
you said in that video,
we are the artists of our story.
>>RUIZ: Exactly.
And we have the
instruments to do it.
We have the four
agreements, and we
see what we want to paint,
what we want to create,
which is this three questions.
>>LISA: Constantly
recreating, that's
how you recreate your story.
>>RUIZ: It's changing
all the time.
Then the answer of that
question when you have 12
will be different than
the answer of the question
when you are 16, then
when you just get married,
when you have your children.
All those questions keeps
changing and changing.
It's not the same,
but it's guiding you
in certain directions
of your creation.
>>LISA: Those are
great questions.
>>RUIZ: But you have the tools
to go into whatever directions
you're going.
>>LISA: To continue to ask.
I have to ask, through
all you have been through,
through the heart attack and the
heart transplant and everything
that you've written
about, what fuels you?
What is your biggest why that
you do what you do, Don Miguel?
>>RUIZ: Well, I do
that because of love.
Everything is really about
love because I am love and love
goes with me wherever I go.
If I gave a message,
it's because I love.
And it's not important if people
receive it or not receive it.
They could put everything
I say, put in the trash,
it doesn't matter.
What make me happy is to
share, to give, to create.
And that's the only
why, if there's
any why, because there's
really no reason.
It's just because I love.
I treat myself the way I
do because I love myself.
I treat you the way I treat
you because I love you.
>>LISA: Well, I love you.
>>RUIZ: That's so simple.
>>LISA: Yes, it is so simple.
You can really recreate.
Once you understand this
perception that we can actually
truly change our perceptions
and then recreate our stories,
all that is left is love.
>>RUIZ: Yes.
It's just enjoy
whatever is enjoyable.
>>LISA: That's all that's left.
>>RUIZ: A good
rest is enjoyable.
>>LISA: Yes.
Yes.
Good relationships
are enjoyable.
>>RUIZ: Oh, definitely.
>>LISA: When you're not so
hooked into the story of it
and the taking it personally
and the making assumptions,
it's such freedom.
>>RUIZ: We love our bodies
so much that we give
our body what the body needs.
We go into couples because
we need to give that
to our physical body.
We do it because
we love our body.
And the person that
is with us, they
do that because
she love her body.
Then it's pure magic.
It's unconditional.
>>LISA: I can see how "The
Four Agreements" and why
it's been so
successful over decades
is because it applies to
everything constantly,
and you can really
be a student of it.
>>RUIZ: Yes.
>>LISA: You can be
a student of the--
>>RUIZ: It go to all
the directions in life--
sports, acting, you name it.
>>LISA: Yeah, that's wonderful.
Well, thank you so
much for helping
us be students of the five
agreements, I should say,
and for really teaching
us what it means
to live an incredible life.
Thank you.
>>RUIZ: Well, it's simple.
Let's just enjoy it.
>>LISA: It seems simple.
The way that you say it,
it seems very simple.
Thank you.
And I hope that you
enjoyed that as well.
If you would like to watch
my other interview with Don
Miguel, you can go to
"Inspirations" on Gaia.
I am Lisa Garr, and
until next time,
I invite you to stay aware.
[MUSIC PLAYING]